k0s — Simplest  way to install a kubernetes cluster 
https://www.youtube.com/live/oxpB3dWqDlg?si=NmojvVlJGaPEveEx&t=1160

Docker compose vs K8S

POD is the smallerst deployable unit of K8S 
(generally a shield for containers)
Containers are kept inside POD
Generally there are not more than 6 containers inside a POD (depends upon the application need)


40:17 Bihar wale itne morden kbse ho gye!

54:10 Differences in K8S cluster management (cloud vs on-prem)


INterview question:-
Tell me the architecture of K8S
Indirect interview questions:-
Asking workflow through commands - IF you are hitting kubectl how each component will iteract. 
(it is going to which control plane or worker node first …)

ANSWER:::

Kubernetes Architecture and Components
The Kubernetes architecture consists of two main parts:
1. Control Plane (Master Node)
2. Worker NODE(s)
Control Plane consists of…….
Worker NODE consists of……..


POD is the smallest deployable unit of K8S (because container can never be deployed directly)
Then POD creates containers inside itself according to the .yaml file

CRI is called container interface and it is responsible for to fetch the image from any repo.

Now comming to the Control Plane

kube-api server → The hub if any component wants to communicate with another component.
The hub everyone will communicate through & coordinate with.

Control manager -  Responsible for the deployment
(Determines the requirements (taking care of ETCD and .yaml files) and tells the CRI how many POD’s need to be deployed according to the requirement)

Scheduler -  Responsible for scheduling the POD on the desired node NODE
Taking care of the affinity rules (affinity node/pod selector)  , the scheduler deploys the POD on the desired node.

1:07:30
etcd - (Brain of the cluster)
Keeps the record of who is working where and on what. 
(Record here means Information of all instances running as meta data)
(back up of etcd means a backup of all states of k8s cluster)


Tool to take backup of K8S (etcd) → Velero
In Cloud solutions like AWS, EKS manages the Kubernetes control plan and ETCD, So, customers don't have direct access to ETCD.
For cluster level backup and disaster recovery, We use Kubernetes aware backup solutions. such as Valero or AWS backup. depending on the requirement.


cloud control manager - facilitates connection and communication with cloud provider (API)
Use case - It communicates with load balancer and fetches public link in case service type  (service.yaml) is set to Load balancer

Now comming back inside the WORKER-NODE

Kubelet ( The Node Captain ) - responsible for NODE communication with kube-api server
Makes sure employees (POD) are working and if not working inform controller manager and terminate them and onboard new employee(new POD)

kube-proxy - 
Responsible for the net working/communication between the POD’s and others! is handeled by the  kube-proxy

kube-proxy → Friend
Kubelet → (Team Lead) Enemy



Interview question
If kubelet is affected the connectivity (from worker node) to Master node (Control plane)  is lost. So what will happen if you loose  connectivity to the master-node?

The cluster will keep working but…
Our worker nodes will not be able to gather new information. If any problems occur like:
-pod is down, it won’t be able to restart
-pod will not be replaced
-will not able able to scale up or down acc to the requirement

Hence unless there is any issue (or requirement to scale up or down) we do not require access to the master node.





